Vim - Vi improved

My go to text editor of choice is Vim.  What I want most
out of vim is the ability to edit text files in terminal
windows in a unicode aware way.  I want my editing
sessions to be CLI centric, but still integrate well
into the Linux GUI environment.

1. Minimalistic Configuration:

  Here is an example of a very simplistic ~/.vimrc file:

    syntax off
    set encoding=utf-8
    set fileencoding=utf-8
    set tabstop=4
    set shiftwidth=4
    set expandtab
    set mouse=

  The first line turns off program language syntax highlighting.  

  The next two lines make vim more unicode aware.

  The next 3 lines have the tab key put in 4 spaces, which is
  my default for C/C++ and Python.  For Haskell and Scala, I
  find typing 2 spaces easier than hitting the tab key once.

  Out-off-the-box on many Linux distributions, vim has been
  configured to hijack the mouse from the terminal emulator.
  This will cause the mouse to reposition the cursor.  This
  will be very familiar to Windows users, but this doesn't
  suit my "sloppy mouse focus" desktop style.  This is especially
  annoying because now I have to precisely position the cursor
  before pasting.  I can't highlight and paste from the editing
  session, nor summon the terminal emulator menu via a
  right-click, unless vim is in visual mode.  The last line
  in the above .vimrc file will prevents this.  

  While in vim, you can turn this mouse stealing behavior
  back on via,

    :set mouse=n

  My desktop gui environment is very old school.  I configure
  things to use "sloppy" mouse focus.  Also, I do not have 
  windows jump to the top of the Z-order just because they
  got the focus or received a mouse click.  Alt-click or
  lt-click-title_bar will bring the window to the top if I
  want.  Double-click title bar to make window full screen,
  middle-click title bar to drop window to the bottom of the
  Z-order.  This enables me to interact with vim in a small
  area of a terminal window while having another windows on
  top.  This is incredibly useful.  You are not constantly
  having to juggle windows around nor do you need two 42"
  monitors.

  In vim I find the Caps-Lock key annoying since it is easy to
  accidentally hit and commands like j or J do much different
  things.  Since this is much more annoying to me than the use
  case for Caps-Lock, I remap the key to be a second escape key.
  My left pinky is much happier.  This can be done through the
  Gnome-2 GUI configuration settings and in Xfce you can add

    xmodmap -e "clear Lock" -e "keysym Caps_Lock = Escape"

  to the Application Autostart section of Session and Startup
  of Settings.

2. Cursor movement:

      h,i,j,k   move cursor one character (also arrow keys)
      w, W      move forward to beginning next word
      b, B      move back to beginning of previous word
      e, E      move forward to end of word
      $         move to end of line
      ^         move to first non-whitespace character on line 
      0         move to first character on line
      %         move to the matching (, ) or [, ] or {, }
      (         move to beginning of sentence
      )         move to beginning of next sentence
      {         move up a paragraph
      }         move down paragraph
      G         move to last line in file
      gg        move to first line in file
      f<char>   move forward to next <char> on current line
      ;         move forward to target of last f command
      ,         move backward to target of last f command
      3f<char>  move forward to 3rd occurrence of <char> on line
      /pattern<ret>    Search forward for pattern (pattern can be
                       a regular expression).
      ?pattern<ret>    search backwards for pattern
      /<ret>    search forward for last pattern
      ?<ret>    search backward for last pattern
      n         search forward or backward for last pattern

3. Interacting with the buffer:

     yy    yank line to buffer (copy)
     dd    delete line and put in buffer (cut)
     5dd   delete 5 lines and put in buffer
     x     delete character under cursor to buffer
     p     paste buffer contents "after"
     P     paste buffer contents "before"

   What "before" or "after" mean depends on what is
   in the buffer.

   y and d can be used with all the cursor positioning
   commands in section 2 

     d$    delete to end of line and put in buffer
     3yw   yank three words to buffer, starting at cursor
     d2fz  delete from cursor to 2nd z on current line
     2y3w  ends up yanking 6 words

   You can use named buffers to store text.

     'adw  delete word and put in buffer a
     'A2yy yank 2 lines and append to buffer a
     'sd$  delete to end of line and put in buffer "s"
     'sp   paste contents of buffer "s" after cursor
     'aP   paste contents of buffer "a" before cursor

   One use case for named buffers is that you can copy
   multiple items from multiple files and paste them into
   later files.

4. Commands to Insert or manipulate text:

   Vim has two main modes, these commands take vim from "command"
   mode to "typing input mode."  To return to "command" mode,
   type ESC.  

     i    insert text at cursor
     a    insert text after cursor
     I    insert text at beginning of line
            after initial white space
     0I   insert text beginning of line
     A    insert text at end of line
     o    open new line after current line to insert text
     O    open new line before current line to insert text
     3cw  change next three words
     c3w  change next three words
     c$   change text to end of line
     5cc  change next 5 lines
     5C   change next 5 lines
     c^   change text before cursor, excluding initial white space
     s    delete current character and enter text mode
     ~    change case of current character, advance one character,
            stay in command mode
     r    change current character to next character typed,
            stay in command mode

   While in "typing input mode," you can navigate through
   the file with the arrow keys.

5. Undo/redo commands:

      u       undo previous edit
      ctrl-r  redo edit undone

   These can be used to linearly undo and redo edits.  Sort
   of like the arrow buttons in a web browser.

   Aside: It is possible in vim to navigate entire edit
          trees, though I never felt the need to learn
          how.

   Navigating with the arrow keys while in "typing input
   mode" will result in multiple edits to undo/redo.

6. Line editor commands:

   Vim is an open source version of the Unix editor vi,
   which is a CLI visual version of the Berkeley Unix
   line editor ex, which itself is a re-implementation of
   the AT&T Unix line editor ed. 

   On really old terminals, essentially line printers with
   keyboards, the descendants of teletypes, you edited files
   one line at a time.

   Use the : command to enter a line editor command.  The
   cursor jumps down to the bottom of the terminal and prompts
   you with the : you just typed.

     :w        Write to disk file you are editing.
     :w file   Write to file, unlike MS Word, you are still
               editing the original file.
     :q        Quit editing, vim will warn you if you have
               unsaved changes.
     :wq       Write to disk, then quit.
     :q!       Quit without saving unsaved changes.
     :n        Move to next file given on command line.
     :wn       Write to disk and move on to next file to edit.
     :42       Move cursor to beginning of line 42.
     :#        Give line number of current line cursor is on.
     :s/foo/bar/   Substitute first instance of foo with bar
                   on current line. (foo can be a regular expression)
     :s/foo/bar/g   Substitute all instances of foo with bar.
     :17,42s/foo/bar/g   Substitute all instances of foo with
                         bar on lines 17 through 42.

7. Dealing with whitespace characters:

   Tell vim to indicate where line endings and tabs are,

     :set list

   to return to displaying tabs and lind endings normally,

     :set nolist

   This is a wonderful feature to get rid of tabs and
   trailing whitespace.

8. Repeating commands:

     .    repeat the last command

   This is frequently used in conjunction with the n command.
   The command is the last regular vim command mode command
   that changed text, not a line editor command.

9. Spell checking:

   To set the default language to US English for spell checking,
   put the following into your ~/.vimrc file,

     set spelllang=en_us

   To turn on and off spell checking while in vim,

     :set spell
     :set nospell

10. Visual mode:

   Todo.

11. End remarks:

   Editors like Vim or Emacs are very powerful.  I have just
   scratched the surface of what is possible with Vim.  I
   choose this minimalistic approach since it fits into my
   brain and allows me to be much more productive than what
   is provided with WYSIWYG editors, or even context sensitive
   editors provided by IDEs.

   There is a backward compatibility mode that forces vim to
   behave very much like vi -> vim -u NONE -C.  I think this
   is a too reactionary approach and not sure all of its
   ramifications.  All I can say is that it does not make vim
   a clone of System V vi.  Nor do I want it to be.

